------------------------------------------------------------------------
CS322 Languages and Compiler Design II                        Homework 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Background:
-----------
This homework is intended to familiarize you with the use of x86-64
assembly language.  You should complete this exercise using the AT&T
syntax; even if you know the "Intel syntax", you should not use it here
because that won't help you to develop familiarity with the notation
that we will be using in class.  Also note that we are not expecting
substantial experience with assembly language programming beyond what we
have covered in class/labs and the supporting materials that have been
provided on D2L (including the collection of videos and review slides).
We are also not expecting you to use special x86-64 instructions; you
should be able to complete this homework using only the x86-64
instructions that we have shown you in the supporting materials.  If you
feel tempted to use additional instructions that you know already, or if
find something in Intel documentation that was not covered in the
supporting materials, then check with me first; it probably isn't
necessary.  Treat this as if you are working for a company that has very
strict (and narrow) coding guidelines when it comes to x86-64
programming!

Arrays:
-------
In these exercises, we will be working with arrays of 32 bit int values.
Each int value, of course, takes four bytes when stored in memory.
Unlike the examples that we covered in labs, we will represent an array
containing n numbers using a block of (n+1) words.  The first word in
each such array contains the number, n, of elements in the rest of the
array.  For example, a 4-element array containing the numbers 0, 1, 2,
and 3, would be stored in memory as a sequence of 5 words:

    { 4, 0, 1, 2, 3 }

This representation (unlike the alternative approach that we saw in the
lab examples) allows us to include zero elements in an array.  For
example, we can represent an array with 7 zeros in it using the
following sequence:

    { 7, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 }

Note, however, that the length information at the front of the array
must be strictly observed.  Thus the following two sequences of words
both represent the same array, even though we have written more elements
down than the length that is stated at the front in each case:

    { 2, 5, 6, 7, 8 }
    { 2, 5, 6, 8, 7 }

Problems:
---------
For each of the following tasks, you are asked to write a fragment of
x86-64 code that takes the starting addresses of two images, represented
as above, in the rdi and rsi registers as its input and returns a single
integer as its result in eax.

The six specific programs that you should implement for this homework
assignment are as follows:

Program 1: The result should be the total value of the numbers in the
	   two arrays, not including the length fields at the start of
	   each array.  The two arrays themselves should not be
	   modified.

Program 2: The result should be the total number of zeros in the first
	   array plus the total number of nonzeros in the second array.

Program 3: The result should be 1 and the contents of the first array
	   should be reversed.  The second array should not be changed.

Program 4: If the two input arrays have the same length, then the
	   contents of the two arrays should be swapped and the return
	   result should be 0.  If the two arrays have different
	   lengths, then the return result should be the absolute value
	   of the difference between their lengths.

Program 5: If the two input arrays have the same length, then the
	   contents of the two arrays should be compared in pairwise
	   fashion, and the elements of the arrays should be swapped so
	   that the first array contains the minimum value of each pair
	   and the second array contains the maximum value.  For
	   example, if the two input arrays are:

               { 5, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
               { 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0}

           then the output arrays will be:

               { 5, 0, 1, 2, 1, 0}
               { 5, 4, 3, 2, 3, 4}

	   If the two arrays are of equal length, then the return result
	   should be the dot (or inner) product of the numbers in the
	   two arrays.  (i.e., the sum of the products of each
	   corresponding pair of numbers in the array.)  For the example
	   above, the return value would be 10 (i.e., 0*4 + 1*3 + 2*2 +
	   3*1 + 4*0).

	   If the two arrays have different lengths, then the return
	   result should be the sum of the lengths of the two arrays.

Program 6: The overall effect of this program, viewing the contents
	   of the two arrays as a single sequence of numbers, should be
	   to "rotate" the values forward, shifting each number towards
	   the start of the array and moving the number that was
	   originally at the front to the back.  Note that the lengths
	   of the two arrays should not be changed during this process.
	   For example, the contents of two input arrays:

                { 4, 0, 1, 2, 3 }  and   { 3, 4, 5, 6 }

	   can be viewed as representing the following sequence of
	   numbers (comprising the numbers from the first array followed
	   by the numbers from the second):

                0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

	   After rotating this sequence of numbers as specified, we
	   obtain the following new sequence:

                1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 0.

	   And so, for this particular case the contents of the two
	   arrays after rotation should be as follows:

                { 4, 1, 2, 3, 4 }  and   { 3, 5, 6, 0 }.

	   Be sure that your program works correctly even if one or both
	   of the input arrays is empty.  For example, a rotation of the
	   two arrays:

                { 4, 0, 1, 2, 3 }  and   { 0 }

	   should produce the following output arrays:

		{ 4, 1, 2, 3, 0 }  and   { 0 }.

	   In all cases, the return result (i.e., the value in eax at
	   the end of your program) should be the total number of
	   elements in the two arrays.  (So, for the two examples shown
           above, the return results would be 7 and 4, respectively.)

Specific instructions for developing and testing your solutions on
the computer (which is required to obtain full credit) are provided
in the README file that is part of the materials that you can download
for this assignment.

And, of course, please ask (on the D2L discussions, during office
hours, in class, in person, ...) if you get stuck and need further
help or clarification!

How to prepare for submission:
------------------------------
You should prepare your solutions to each of the problems above as
carefully commented assembly language source files with names
program1.s, program2.s, ..., program6.s to match the problem numbers.
In each case, you should use an appropriate template (linux.s or
mac.s) as your starting point.

Of course, you should test your solutions carefully, but you are not
expected to include details of your testing with your submission.
Instead, an additional test program will be distributed two days before
submission deadline, and you will be asked to provide the output from
that test program as part of your submission.  Detailed instructions on
this aspect of the assignment will be provided when the test program is
distributed.  If you have followed the instructions described above,
however, then it will be easy for you to generate the submission
materials just by running a simple script (that we will provide).

You should plan to complete the development and testing of your
solution before the testing program is released.  Do not assume that
you will be able to use our testing program as a substitute for your
own testing; it is not intended for that purpose and will almost
certainly not meet your needs.  The reason for including a two day
delay between the release of the testing program and the final
deadline is simply to provide you with a little flexibility in
finding time to run the testing program and submit your results.

Minimum passing grade:
----------------------
All six programs will be equally weighted, and you will need to have
completed at least one of them (or equivalent in aggregate score) to
satisfy the minimum grade requirement (i.e., to avoid an F or X for
this assignment).

------------------------------------------------------------------------
